design-proposal: instancetype.kubevirt.io - pkg/instancetype refactor (#323)
kubevirt/community: design-proposals/instancetype.kubevirt.io/pkg-instancetype-refactor.md

## Motivation

Ultimately the instance type code base is becoming more difficult to both maintain and extend. Refactoring the code to make it more manageable for future contributors and maintainers ahead of the API graduating to `v1` is extremely important as a result.

## Goals

* Break up `pkg/instancetype/instancetype.go` and `pkg/instancetype/instancetype_test.go`  
* Provide finer grain implementations of common instance type and preference functionality such as find, apply, store and infer  
* Replace the public `InstancetypesMethods` interface with private smaller interfaces defined closer to their consumers
* All existing functionality should be unchanged by this work, all functional tests should therefore be untouched

## Non Goals

* Any behavioral changes to the API during the release v1.4 cycle should happen outside of this work

## User Stories

> * As a developer working on `pkg/instancetype` I want to see the code logically separated for easier maintenance and future improvements  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* As a developer working on instance types and preferences I want to see the code logically separated for easier maintenance and future improvements
```

When done we will have `pkg/instancetype`, `pkg/preference`, etc.?

> * As a developer working on `pkg/instancetype` I want to see the API graduate to `v1`

Reviewer: It is not part of this proposal though?

Author: In my mind this refactor is something we need to do ahead of the API hitting v1 but I hadn't made that explicit anywhere else in the doc. I'll add something to goals etc.

## Repos

* kubevirt/kubevirt

# Design

## Break out preference code into a `pkg/preference` package

Much of the business logic around preferences is heavily intertwined with instance types. This should be extracted into a separate package for easier maintenance.

## Move lookup code under `pkg/{instancetype,preference}/find`

Resource lookup code for instance types and preferences should also be extracted into new `find` packages.

Any common code (decoding `ControllerRevisions` etc) placed under `pkg/instancetype`.

## Move apply code under `pkg/{instancetype,preference}/apply`

The logic around applying instance types and preferences is significantly different and should be clearly separated.

Further separation should also allow for specific preferences to be applied in specific use cases.

An example being during device hot-plug where a subset of preferences need to be applied, for example network interface or disk preferences.

## Move infer code under `pkg/{instancetype,preference}/infer`

> Any common code placed under `pkg/instancetype`.

Author: Yup apologies this should actually say `pkg/instancetype/infer` but I copy pasted between sections, I'll update.

The use of a single public interface exported by `pkg/instancetype` was a mistake.

This should be replaced with smaller simple private interface definitions alongside consumers of the implementations provided by `pkg/{instancetype,preference}`.

Once replaced, `InstancetypeMethods` can be removed from `pkg/instancetype` entirely.

## API Examples

Taking a very simplistic example from  `VMController`, we can replace the use of `InstancetypeMethods` with a private interface defined to meet the requirements of the specific consumer.

For the sake of this example the only requirement for the handler is to find an instance type, thus we can define the following interface within the controller:

```go
type instancetypeHandler interface {
    Find(vm *v1.VirtualMachine) (*v1beta1.VirtualMachineInstancetypeSpec, error)
}
```

As set out above the implementation of this logic will reside under `pkg/instancetype/find` and will satisfy this interface.

```go
type Finder struct {
    Store                   cache.Store
    ClusterStore            cache.Store
    ControllerRevisionStore cache.Store
    Client                  kubevirtcli.KubevirtClient

> }

Author: Yup that's a mistake, the fields should be private. I'll update.

func (f *Finder) Find(vm *v1.VirtualMachine) (*v1beta1.VirtualMachineInstancetypeSpec, error) {
 [..]
}
```

We can then pull in the required implementation into a handler in order to satisfy the interface within the controller:

```go
import "kubevirt.io/kubevirt/pkg/instancetype/find"

type instancetypeHandler interface {
    Find(vm *v1.VirtualMachine) (*v1beta1.VirtualMachineInstancetypeSpec, error)
}

type handler struct {
    find.Finder
}

var _ instancetypeHandler := &handler{}

instancetypeHandler := &handler{
    Finder: instancetypeFind.Finder{
        Store:                  instancetypeStore,
        ClusterStore:           clusterInstancetypeStore,
        ControllerRevisionStore controllerRevisionStore,
        Client:                 virtClient,
    },
}

c := &VMController{
    [..]

>     instancetypeHandler: instancetypeHandler

Reviewer: The idea is to decouple the implementation from the expected behavior.

See

https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/493ae9dc42ed6c83063579b6114968790ab4fd82/docs/coding-conventions.md?plain=1#L237

>     instancetypeHandler: instancetypeHandler

Reviewer 2: Ok, I understand. I haven't seen this usage of interfaces in the codebases much.

>     instancetypeHandler: instancetypeHandler

Author: Yeah the networking folks are using it more and more so I think it's a valid pattern to use now given the coding convention suggestions.

    [..]
}
```

Before using this handler throughout the controller:

```go
func (c *VMController) Sync(){
    [..]
    spec, err := c.instancetypeHandler.Find(vm)
    [..]
}

```

> 

Reviewer: Bonus: No more stubs required in tests.

Author: I don't see how this changes anything tbh, we can still switch out the implementations in unit tests with stubs if we want to.

Reviewer: I meant you are no longer required to implement stubs for interface methods you are not interested in when using reduced private interfaces.
